hi everyone happy New Year this week's
Insight involves polarized or
dichotomous thinking especially as it
relates to self- experience after my
last video on the concept of the false
self I noticed some comments expressing
distress and confusion about what parts
of self-experience can be considered
quote true and what parts should be
considered quote false Concepts like
this can be misleading uh because they
seem to suggest that self experience can
or should be chopped into pieces
separating the good or true Parts while
discarding the bad or false Parts but
that's not really how it works it's
important to recognize that even our
best psychological models are really
vast
oversimplifications when it comes to
parts of the self the answer is almost
always both and rather than either
or in Clinical Psychology we describe
Behavior and feelings as overdetermined
and that means that they arise from
multiple sources
simultaneously it's extremely difficult
if not impossible to isolate a single
cause for any given internal experience
there will always be layers and layers
of
complexity instead of seeking certainty
we generate narratives working models
and we evaluate how well those
narratives or models resonate with both
the facts and the subjective experience
of the individual and we do this with
the awareness that no narrative can
fully capture the whole
truth similarly just as thoughts
feelings and behaviors arise from
multiple simultaneous causes they also
serve multiple simultaneous functions
even a simple Behavior like eating can
serve many functions at the same time
from regulating emotions to
strengthening attachment bonds to
expressing feelings like aggression to
satiating hunger and distracting from
discomfort when we try to describe the
complexity of internal experience
language inevitably falls short models
of personality and emotion are just that
they're models they're approximations
abstractions that help us make sense of
experience and identify patterns but
they should never be taken as literal
represent ations of reality Concepts
like the true and false self are best
understood this way as tools that
describe subjective Dynamics when we
talk about a quote false self we're
describing the development of an
implicit narrative a kind of unconscious
story about who a person believes they
must be often shaped by external
pressures rather than emerging
organically from authentic emotional
discovery y the falseness of it lies in
the way that the self was constructed
around the expectations of other people
rather than out of a genuine exploration
of one's emotional life but this idea
shouldn't be taken as an absolute it's a
flexible framework and it's only useful
in so far as it helps us to make sense
of an individual's lived experience and
observable patterns the danger comes
when we try to treat these Concepts as
literal truths because it it tends to
lead to rigid self-judgments rather than
openness to complexity I often hear from
patients who agonize over whether an act
of kindness or charity was quote truly
selfless they worry that noticing any
selfish motivation whatsoever within
such an act will negate the value of
their actions or mean that they lack a
true self altogether and that they're
really only capable of uh manipulation
or
exploitation these concerns are often
rooted in stigmatizing portrayals of NPD
that they've seen online but the
distress that they create often reflects
a deeper difficulty tolerating
ambiguity the truth is all acts of
Charity have a selfish component it
would be impossible for it to be
otherwise and that's okay kind actions
also bring you feelings of fulfillment
or satisfaction and just because it
feels good to be kind doesn't negate the
possibility of true kindness the problem
only arises when we impose a polarized
All or Nothing lens onto the experience
demanding Purity in a way that ends up
disconnecting us from our
complexity identity thought feeling and
behavior are not dichotomous they're the
products of of dynamic influences
authenticity and inauthenticity are
always intertwined you might be
wondering then what is the value of
diagnosis why even engage in
self-reflection if we can't ever fully
know the truth about our internal world
to a certain extent within each of us
there exists a subjective world that is
forever unknowable to other people so we
work with abstractions tools like case
studies or statistical analysis and
theoretical models there are limits to
what we can know about each other and
there are also limits to what we can
know about ourselves but this doesn't
make self-reflection
feudal on the contrary it challenges us
to become more comfortable with
ambiguity and imperfection and not
knowing paradoxically it's often within
this acceptance of the unknown that we
find both meaning and Beauty every
internal experience contains a blend of
good and bad authentic and inauthentic
true and false psychological Health
involves tolerating this complexity
rather than attempting to strip the self
of
contradiction in fact many forms of
psychological distress arise from
exactly that attempt to rid the self of
ambivalence and reduce complex
experience to a single solitary veilance
we call this black and white thinking
all or nothing thinking or polarized
thinking and when such processes occur
at the level of identity we call it
splitting healing shouldn't involve
passing judgment on what is right or
wrong true or false it's more about
gradually discovering what feels
meaningful and true not in a binary
sense but as part of a richer more
intricate tapestry of experience now I'm
aware that even in what I'm saying here
there's contradiction on the one hand
i'm discussing theories and models that
categorize internal experience on the
other hand I'm emphasizing that such
categorization is ultimately incomplete
and that psychological maturity and
health involves learning to hold
complexity and ambivalence so how can
these ideas be reconciled like I said
earlier it's both and not either or
psychological theories and models help
us to approximate how the mind seems to
work but if we attempt to dissect our
own subjectivity in search of definitive
truths we will inevitably reach an
impass that's the nature of being a
subject a self if you were an object
then such dissection would be simple but
you're a subject a dynamic evolving
process that can't be reduced to Parts
by EMB rcing both what we can know and
the Mystery of what we cannot we move
closer to the fullness of what it means
to be
human Okay so that's it for this week if
you'd like to receive insights like this
on a weekly basis consider becoming a
paid member of the channel your support
is deeply appreciated and helps me
continue creating content like this
until next time take good care
[Music]